Post draft: OpenSearch 3.0 new features, breaking changes and what to expect (#3751)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-04-22-OpenSearch-version-3-features.md

---
layout: post

> title:  "OpenSearch® version 3.0: New features, breaking changes from Apache Lucene™ 10, and what to expect"

Reviewer: Are we dropping "Preview" from the title - assuming this is a first in the series and there is a plan for a follow up?

authors:
 - kwren

> date: 2025-04-22

Reviewer 2: Let's change it to 2025-04-24 - assuming that all edits are incorporated by that date.

categories:
 - technical-post
meta_keywords: 

> meta_description:

Reviewer 2: Please update the meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ OpenSearch 3.0, Apache Lucene 10, JVM 21, breaking changes, performance improvements, Java Security Manager, JavaScript client, SQL plugin, sparse indexing, KNN search, neural search, OpenSearch dashboard

_meta_description:_ Dive into the major updates in OpenSearch 3.0, including Lucene 10 integration, JVM 21 adoption, and performance improvements. Learn about breaking changes, critical upgrades, and enhanced capabilities.

However, these breaking changes also bring powerful new features to the forefront.

In Apache Lucene, you have improvements in both I/O and search parallelism; I/O by adding an API call that allows for asynchronous fetching of data, search by opting for logical partitions within segments over the previous method of segment grouping for parallel searches. 

The JVM being updated to a minimum of 21 also brings about some major benefits like virtual threads, pattern matching for switch statement, sequenced collections, and [more](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/21-relnote-issues.html).

### Java Security Manager removal

Another major breaking change is the replacement of the Java Security Manager. Because it will be [disabled in JVM 24 and onward](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/24/), the OpenSearch maintainers decided to replace it in 3.0. 

There is a ticket tracking progress; it starts with a few different options, and there is a [meta GitHub ticket](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/16913) that goes over the nuts and bolts of why the Java Security Manager needs to be replaced. 

> To see the most current solution proposals, check out [this meta ticket](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/17181). As of this writing the plan is to harden OS security with systemd and the introduction of “[Java Agents](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/instrument/package-summary.html),” which can intercept and manipulate JVM bytecode at runtime. This breaks many features and plugins but is unavoidable as the need to upgrade is imminent.

Author: Could you point me towards the ticket for the implementation? Trying to find it.

- Sparse indexing: also known as primary-key indexing, this organizes data into blocks with recorded minimum and maximum sizes. This allows queries to more efficiently skip non-relevant blocks when querying, which increases CPU/storage efficiency. This was made possible through the I/O parallelism improvements mentioned earlier.
- KNN/Neural search improvements: Because of the improvements to parallel searches we covered previously, parallelized execution of KNN and neural searches has improved in Lucene 10. It also adds improvements to indexing vectors; better parallelization of I/O allows for optimizations to how vectors are stored to really shine, creating a much more scalable neural search engine.

You can learn more about Lucene 10 improvements from its [changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_0_0/changes/Changes.html#v10.0.0).

### Other Performance Improvements

> Not only were there improvements from the Lucene 10 upgrade, but the OpenSearch team has been working on performance gains on the BIG5 benchmark, and overall 3.0 proves much more performant than 2.x; a whopping 8.4x more performant than OpenSearch 1.3 on aggregate!

Reviewer: Should we also highlight the ~20% improvement in aggregate performance across Big5 operations compared to version 2.19?

Big5: https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/big5/operations

### OpenSearch dashboards

The OpenSearch dashboards code also underwent a lot of internal overhauls. A lot of dead code was removed, and some behaviors were modified in order to more closely align with the rest of the OpenSearch project. There were also UI changes, and the discovery tool has been completely reworked and updated.

![A screenshot of the OpenSearch 3.0 dashboard](assets/media/blog_images/2025-04-22-OpenSearch-version-3-features/Dashboards.png)

### SQL Pplugin changes
Finally, the SQL plugin was updated; the DSL format for queries was deprecated and DELETE statements in SQL are no longer supported. For fans of the DSL format, you have many flexible alternatives:
•	SQL
•	PPL, a pipeline-based query language
•	Create an application against the REST API
•	Use one of the many client libraries

> The SparkSQL connector was also removed, affecting projects that use that integration; you can use a JDBC connection or use Spark’s request() library to work with OpenSearch’s REST API instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SparkSQL connector was also removed, affecting projects that use that integration; you can use a JDBC connection or use Spark's request library to work with OpenSearch's REST API instead.
```
